# Simple-Global-Covid-19-and-GDP-Analysis.
Examines a simple relationship between national GDP per-capita and Covid-19 statistics using public datasets. Free for viewing and commentary.

# Lets get started!
This starter data analysis project is structured based on Absent Data's video demonstration: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iwUli5gIcU0&list=WL&index=2&t=2076s
# 1-5
In addition to the four packages he makes use of- Pandas, Seaborn, Matplotlib, and Sklearn- I also include Numpy for the purpose of splicing the public datasets I utilize into a single usable format. The three datasets I use summarize data on world country populations, country GDP per-capita, and by-country reported Covid-19 cases and deaths. Links will be provided at the end of the readme.
Cell 2 prepares the raw data for processing, mainly by limiting each dataset to the latest year (2021 for GDP, 2022 for population, and 2023 for Covid data) and setting up any NA values that might exist to be removed. Cells 3-5 provide heads for each cleaned dataset.
# 6-12
Cells 6-12 splice consistent data from the three dataframes into a single dataframe with columns on a list of countries and their respective continents, cumulative deaths and cases in 2023, 2021 GDP-per-capita in USD, population in 2022, and derived rates of deaths per-thousand cases, cases per-million people, and deaths per-million people. Several notes on the splicing process:
  - Each column is entered into the final dataset assuming that the countries the data cells are assigned to are always arranged in alphabetical order, and that the countries that make it in exist in all three of the base datasets. This should assure that all statistics match their respective countries. The length of each column is confirmed in cell 9. 
  - The rates are derived from the quotients of the statistics in the separate dataframes, rather than official statistics, since the goal of this project is to see how these datasets of different sources interact.
# 13-15
The following three cells conduct univariate visual analysis on the single dataframe (the "percountry" dataframe). Distribution plots on most of the statistics show a distribution significantly skewed to the left, but this is partially due to outliers on the high end. The following kernel density estimate plots raise further questions on the data by showing an unusually low case and death rate per million people in Africa. The apparent "sparing" of Africa from the expected effects of Covid-19 (in WHO data) has puzzled experts, but whatever the reason, these observations are enough to exclude these statistics from any further analysis due to their inonclusivity. In contrast, the death rate per thousand cases (a measure of how often a confirmed covid case would lead to death in a country) is much more in line with expectations, and as such this is the statistic I go on to conduct bivariate and multivariate analysis on. Boxplots repeat the above observations as well as revealing a considerable quantity of outliers. 
# 16-18
Seaborn.lmplot combines a traditional scatterplot with a line of regression, offering an invaluable visual insight into the relationship between two variables, in this case country GDP per-capita and Covid-19 case death rate. The first graph yields a line with a significant negative slope that is nevertheless skewed by outliers in both variables. At this point I use the descriptive statistics for the percountry dataframe in (shown in cell #12) to limit the dataframe to include only countries with each of the two statistics within three standard deviations of the mean. The graph of the resulting dataframe (percountry1) shows a similar trend while being more concise, and I use this new dataframe for the multivariate clustering. Cell #18 shows correlation coefficients between all variablees, including the inverse relationship between GDP per-capita and Covid death rate.
# 19-27
I start by determining an appropriate number of clusters for a k-means algorithm by calculating inertia scores for algorithms using 1-11 clusters. As the graph in Cell #23 illustrates, adding more clusters after the third becomes redundant, so the final algorithm uses three. This works better than expected as the three clusters show a clear division of countries into "low, middle, and high income" countries in cell #25. Cell #27 yields the final results, with an imperfect but visible lowering of Covid-19 death rates as countries ascend in income.
# Sources
  - Country Populations:  https://worldpopulationreview.com/
  - Country GDP: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
  - International Covid-19 data: https://covid19.who.int/data
